New multi-course structure for training materials (#486)
nextflow-io/training: docs/hello_nextflow/03_hello_plumbing.md

> # Part 3: Hello Plumbing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Part 3: Hello Workflows
```
Maybe? We haven't really had a workflow so far, just a single step- this marks the point where we actually move beyond a single process into genuine worflows.

Author: I'm totally open to changing the name. FWIW 'Plumbing' speaks to me because it feels directly evocative of what this one is about, ie specifically how do you connect the pipes. I worry that 'Workflows' is maybe a bit too generic; I see what you're going for but is that going to be obvious to a naive user? They might go "isn't it all about workflows?" Perhaps we can poll for opinions/suggestions.

Reviewer: This was kind of conscious (kind of). I was thinking the first sentence could be along the lines "You thought you'd been thinking about workflows already, but real workflows do these things..."

Author: This was changed to Hello Workflow based on group consensus

Most real-world workflows involve more than one step.
In this training module, you'll learn how to connect processes together in a multi-step workflow.

This will teach you the Nextflow way of achieving the following:

1. Making data flow from one process to the next
2. Collecting outputs from multiple process calls into a single process call

> 3. Passing more than one input through a channel

Reviewer: We just did that in the previous module, right?

Author: Do you mean "Passing more than one input through a channel"? Here it's about having multiple 'tracks' in the input channel, eg the data but also some parameters etc., as a opposed to 'several pieces of the same kind of data'. In general this is a point of confusion for which we should try to develop a controlled vocabulary, because 'multiple inputs' ends up being ambiguous

Reviewer: Yes, I actually realised what you meant further down. This probably needs to be something like 'passing collections of elements to a single task' or something similar.

Author: Are you using 'collections of elements' in the same way I'm using 'input tracks in a channel'?

Author: fixed this in a previous pass

4. Handling multiple outputs coming out of a process

To demonstrate, we will continue building on the domain-agnostic Hello World example from Parts 1 and 2.

> This time, we're going to make the following changes to our workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This time, we're going to make the following changes to our workflow to better reflect how people build actual workflows:
```

> 1. Add a second step that converts the greeting to uppercase;
> 2. Add a third step that collects all the transformed greetings and writes them into a single file;
> 3. Add a parameter to name the final output file and pass that as a secondary input to the collection step;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add a second step that converts the greeting to uppercase.
2. Add a third step that collects all the transformed greetings and writes them into a single file.
3. Add a parameter to name the final output file and pass that as a secondary input to the collection step.
```

4. Make the collection step also output a simple statistic about what was processed.

---

## 0. Warmup: Run `hello-plumbing.nf`

We're going to use the workflow script `hello-plumbing.nf` as a starting point.
It is equivalent to the script produced by working through Part 2 of this training course.

Just to make sure everything is working, run the script once before making any changes:

```bash
nextflow run hello-plumbing.nf
```

This should produce the following output:

```console title="Output"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.0

Launching `hello-plumbing.nf` [tender_becquerel] DSL2 - revision: f7fbe8e223

executor >  local (3)
[74/e135b2] sayHello (3)       [100%] 3 of 3 ✔
```

---

## 1. Add a second step to the workflow

> We want to add a second step to convert the greeting to uppercase, using the classic UNIX text replacement command `tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Real workflows have more than one process! So it's time to start adding some more.

We'll add a second step to convert the greeting to uppercase, using the classic UNIX text replacement command `tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'`.
```

First, we need to write a new process that wraps the `tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'` command.
Then we'll need to add it to the workflow, setting it up to take the output of the `sayHello()` process as input.

### 1.0. Run the uppercasing command in the terminal

> The step we want to add to our workflow will use the text replacement command `tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'` to convert the greetings output by the first step to uppercase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The step we want to add to our workflow will use the text replacement command `tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]'` to convert the greetings output by the first step to uppercase.
```
Repetitive with above.

In the workflow block, make the following code change:

_Before:_

```groovy title="hello-plumbing.nf" linenums="56"
    // convert the greeting to uppercase
    convertToUpper()
}
```

_After:_

```groovy title="hello-plumbing.nf" linenums="56"
    // convert the greeting to uppercase
    convertToUpper(sayHello.out)
}
```

For a simple case like this (one output to one input), that's all we need to do to connect two processes!

### 1.4. Run the workflow again with `-resume`

Let's run this using the `-resume` flag, since we've already run the first step of the workflow successfully.

```bash
nextflow run hello-plumbing.nf -resume
```

There is now an extra line in the console output, which corresponds to the new process we just added:

```console title="Output"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.10.0

Launching `hello-plumbing.nf` [cheeky_hamilton] DSL2 - revision: f7fbe8e223

executor >  local (3)
[45/eb4757] sayHello (2)       [100%] 3 of 3, cached: 3 ✔
[ae/4579ab] convertToUpper (3) [100%] 3 of 3 ✔
```

Have a look inside the work directory of one of the calls to the second process.

```bash
tree -a work/ae/4579ab5b4f2c1d986d3a955e31f2b7/
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(you'll need to adapt this tree command to the actual directory name you see in the output from your workflow run)

```

You should find two output files listed: the output of the first process, and the output of the second.

```console title="Output"
work/ae/4579ab5b4f2c1d986d3a955e31f2b7/
├── Holà-output.txt -> /workspace/gitpod/hello-nextflow/work/dc/93eab52bd47ef198b1cfe1a7721b4b/Holà-output.txt
└── UPPER-Holà-output.txt
```

The output of the first process is in there because Nextflow staged it there in order to have everything needed for execution within the same subdirectory.
However, it is actually a symbolic link pointing to the the original file in the subdirectory of the first process call.

> By default, Nextflow uses symbolic links rather than copies to stage input and intermediate files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, when running on a single machine as we're doing here, Nextflow uses symbolic links rather than copies to stage input and intermediate files.
```

Gets more complex when we start talking about cloud etc.

You'll also find the final outputs in the `results` directory since we used the `publishDir` directive in the second process too.

!!! note

    All we did was connect the output of `sayHello` to the input of `convertToUpper` and the two processes could be run serially.
    Nextflow did the hard work of handling individual input and output files and passing them between the two commands for us.
    This is the power of channels in Nextflow, doing the busywork of connecting our pipeline steps together.

### Takeaway

You know how to add a second step that takes the output of the first step as input.

### What's next?

Learn how to collect outputs from batched process calls and feed them into a single process.

---

## 2. Add a third step to collect all the greetings

> When we apply a transformation to a batch of inputs, like we're doing here to the multiple greetings, we'll often want to collect the transformed outputs and feed them into a single step that performs some kind of analysis or summation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we use a process to apply a transformation to each of the elements in a channel, like we're doing here to the multiple greetings, we sometimes want to collect elements from the output channel of that process, and feed them into another process that performs some kind of analysis or summation.
```

I think it's worth being specific with the channel/ process language, since we've introduced those concepts, so that people get used to them.

> Here we're simply going to write them all out to a single file, using the UNIX `cat` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next step we're simply going to write all the elements of a channel to a single file, using the UNIX `cat` command.
```

Run the following in your terminal:

```bash
echo 'Hello' | tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]' > UPPER-Hello-output.txt
echo 'Bonjour' | tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]' > UPPER-Bonjour-output.txt
echo 'Holà' | tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]' > UPPER-Holà-output.txt
cat UPPER-Hello-output.txt UPPER-Bonjour-output.txt UPPER-Holà-output.txt > COLLECTED-output.txt
```

The output is a text file called `COLLECTED-output.txt` that contains the uppercase versions of the original greetings.

```console title="COLLECTED-output.txt"
HELLO
BONJOUR
HOLà
```

That is the result we want to achieve with our workflow.

### 2.1. Outline the collection step as a Nextflow process

We can write an outline for our new process based on the previous one, leaving out a few pieces that require extra work.

Add the following process definition to the workflow script:

```groovy title="hello-plumbing.nf" linenums="41"
/*
 * Collect uppercase greetings into a single output file
 */
process collectGreetings {

    publishDir 'results', mode: 'copy'

    input:
        ???

    output:
        path "COLLECTED-output.txt"

    script:
    """
    ??? > 'COLLECTED-output.txt'
    """
}
```

> This is what we can write based on what you've learned so far.

Reviewer: Is this really true? We already know about variable path inputs, and the syntax isn't different for multiple files.

Author: Well we don't know yet that the syntax isn't different. As a naive user, I'm like ok, I'm confident in all of this, but for this next bit I need to check if the syntax is the same or if i need to do something special.

params.batch = 'test-batch'
```

Remember you can override that default value by specifying a value with `--batch` on the command line.

### 3.4. Pass the `batch` parameter to the process

To provide the value of the parameter to the process, we need to add it in the process call.

In the workflow block, make the following code change:

_Before:_

```groovy title="hello-plumbing.nf" linenums="80"
    // collect all the greetings into one file
    collectGreetings(convertToUpper.out.collect())
```

_After:_

```groovy title="hello-plumbing.nf" linenums="80"
    // collect all the greetings into one file
    collectGreetings(convertToUpper.out.collect(), params.batch)
```

!!! warning

    You MUST provide the inputs to a process in the EXACT SAME ORDER as they are listed in the input definition block of the process.

### 3.5. Run the workflow

Let's try running this with a batch name on the command line.

```bash
nextflow run hello-plumbing.nf -resume --batch trio
```

It runs successfully and produces the desired output:

```console title="bash"
cat results/COLLECTED-trio-output.txt
```

```console title="Output"
HELLO
BONJOUR
HOLà
```

### Takeaway

> You know how to pass more than one input through a channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You know how to pass collected inputs through a channel.
```

To dissambuguate from the earlier examples with multiple items.

Author: I find this _more_ ambiguous though; this reads like it's about the collected greetings, but it's not; it's about that parameter that constitutes an extra 'track' in the input channel. This is exactly what I was talking about in my other comment just now; the ways we talk about multiple inputs is inconsistent and confusing.

Reviewer: To me 'passing more than one input through a channel' covers both things- you're doing it in both cases. The difference here is that we're passing multiple inputs to a single task (a task being a single iteration of a process).

Author: But that's not what this specific line is about; that's not the takeaway. The takeaway from this specific section is that we now know that if the process expects `path foo` and `val bar`, i have to write the process call as `myProcess(foo, bar)`. Before this, all I knew to do was `myProcess(foo)`.

Reviewer: OK, apologies for the quick comment, I conflated issues while multitasking and I've re-read. 

In fact, the point of this section (section 3) is that we've added a second input to the process, and filled that from a new parameter, right? So both of our versions are wrong. It's nothing to do with multiple inputs through 'a' channel (in fact there are now 2 channels, though one is implicit).

Maybe something like:

```
You know how to add more than one input channel to a process, and use both inputs from the workflow
```

Author: Updated this in a previous pass, thanks for clarifying
